---json
{
  "title": "The Reason Why",
  "description": "The power of knowing the reason why you are building something can totally change the way software is built.",
  "date": "2017-11-11",
  "tags": [
    "Software Engineering",
    "leading"
  ]
}
---

Something that I have been thinking about over the last little while is about how influence in software engineering can be improved. I used to think it was enough to just have a product owner send down the work to the team and that is all that it would take. As I have spent more time in the industry I'm realizing that there is a lot missing if that is all that you have. Although I may have a computer science degree it definitely doesn't feel like much of a science that I am doing day to day. As has been said before there is definitely an art to software development and also means that many times there are multiple reasonable solutions to the same problem. As I have been working more in preparing features at the architectural level at work I often bump into the problem of how do I communicate why I am pitching a certain direction to implement a feature. It's not that I am trying to force them into a particular solution but I want to mind dump everything that I have learned so that the feature teams can actually pick up the solution and not have to spin their wheels on the same issues that I did. This is one of the big value add opportunities that I think my position is suppose to bring to the table. 

A great example of someone that I think does this great is the SVP of Engineering at my company. He has been at the company for quite some time which you may think means he has just settled into a cushy job where it's the same old from him all the time but that is quite the opposite. He is constantly pushing the organization forward and is a great influence on the whole organization. Talking with many of the people in my department it was talking with him in the interview process that really settled that they wanted to work at this company. I digress though. There have been two particular occasions that I can think of where this VP expertly demonstrated the ability to explain the why. 

The first one was in a sudden meeting that was called a month or two before our company's conference with customers. He was bringing an idea that the CEO wanted to get preliminarily  developed before this conference that we had never even heard of. We of course try to claim we live agile principles which includes ["[We] welcome changing requirements, even late in development."](http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html) Even so this can be hard to have to all of a sudden direction especially is this idea were to be built so quickly without too much refinement into whether this was the right thing to do or not. There was a particular attendee in this meeting that strongly opposed the idea and strived to convince others to join his cause. There are many ways he could have handled this probably most simply pulling rank on the individual however he just sat and thought for a moment and then broke into a, somewhat, made up story about what is happening in our organization and to our customers without this particular feature implemented. Although it sounds silly it was an emotional story about a saleswoman (he named one) that was on the phone at this very moment with a customer having to sell a product to a customer that we would have to support for years to come even though it was a premise install and we are trying to move to the cloud because we didn't have this feature. He then restarted the story this time pretending that the feature was already implemented. It is hard to express the skillfulness that this was expressed. After finishing the two similar stories but with entirely different outcomes he expressed that is why he believed this was the right way to do things. You could then see a total 180 degree change in the original dissenter as he became a proponent of this feature. 

So why did this dissenter from mere minutes earlier all of sudden have no issues with implementing the feature; nay, become a driver for the implementation of this feature? It wasn't because his superior told him that's what we were doing, it wasn't for fear of his job, it wasn't anything like that. It was because understanding the why behind the what made the desire come from inside. Often in software development I think it is easy to become disconnected from our users, we may give them cute names in our stories but it's still hard to connect. That is why it is all the more important that POs, manager, execs, architects, PMs, and other developers understand the why behind their work and spread the why with those that they work with. 