---
title: Make the Easy Thing the Right Thing
description: Discussion of exploiting human nature by making the right thing the easy thing when building systems.
date: 2022-04-11
hero_image: ./make-easy-right.jpg
tags:
  - design patterns
  - wayfinding
  - architecture
---

It is within human nature to take the easiest path from point A to B. This is very often a great thing. Why should we exert extra energy in accomplishing a task? Bill Gates is claimed to have said, "I choose a lazy person to do a hard job. Because a lazy person will find an easy way to do it." All of this being said, sometimes what initially seems like an easier way to do something can end up being short-sighted. The ultimate goal, I believe, is to have the easy thing be the correct thing to do. In this way, we can take advantage of the drive of human nature to take the easy way and make it the right way, the way we would like people to go.

Recently I have had the opportunity to work in a ColdFusion project. [ColdFusion](https://coldfusion.adobe.com/) is a 27-year-old programming language that [bills itself](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adobe_ColdFusion) as a "rapid web-application development platform". Having worked in both I would put it in the same arena as PHP in the development style (although with vastly less community). Many of the components of the language all optimize for this rapid development. Server-side UI rendering, extremely easy datastore querying, out-of-the-box ORM, caching, PDF rendering, LDAP integration, serialization, and more. It is a "batteries included" language. Even with all of this, it is not a popular language. There are probably several reasons for this from its mainline corporate control and its lack of community (a bit of a [network effect](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/n/network-effect.asp) problem). I wonder, though, if part of it falling out of favor has been due to the many poor quality codebases that have been written into it. By allowing so many things to be done so quickly and easily without any care for proper design the web applications built in it quickly can fall into disrepair. This is not to say that the language is a bad language, simply that it lends itself to being used poorly. I think historically PHP has received some of this similar criticism but has been much more successful at overcoming it.

Taking these lessons to heart we are presented with the idea that our desire shouldn't be to make everything easy in the systems we build, simply the "right" things should be easy. Not only for those building the system but also for the users using the system. So what is "right"? You definitely won't be successful in making the right things easy if you don't know what right is. As often is the answer to questions, the answer to the question of "what is right" ends up being "it depends". In different circumstances and systems, different things may be right. So the first step before paving the way for the right things is to determine the goals and attributes that you want your system to embody. Maybe it is the separation between different architectural layers. Maybe it is certain UX patterns that you want to make use of to achieve a specific goal. Whatever it is, figuring out what it is and agreeing on it as a common goal will be the first step. Only then can you start paving the way for those behind you to make the way easy.

In a system that I was working on we were introducing a new language to our approved languages to use. As part of our previous system, we had a common problem where the database schema was the point of integration between different parts of the system. We also decided that we wanted all database queries to go through an ORM. Choosing these as some core goals that we wanted to address we sat down and looked at how we could pave the way for this. Seeing as this was still building on the old system there were already some complexities with connecting with the database. Rather than seeing this as an obstacle, we saw it as a benefit. That meant we didn't have to worry about making wrong ways hard, every way was already hard. So we built some reusable code that made using ORM the right way easy. Occasionally people would ask how to go around it. We would keep these methods pretty quiet but invited these questions whenever someone ran into a obstacle. Sometimes this led to us steering people away from going around the system, sometimes this meant we would enhance our existing code which helped everyone, and occasionally this meant we would help do things the hard way because it made sense in a particular case.

There are many ways that one could accomplish guiding people to the right place to do the right thing. Find what works for you and your organization. Recognizing and exploiting human nature to your advantage can be extremely fruitful. Those working in the prepared environment will find that the way is well paved for them to do the right thing. This will lead to more productivity and happiness which can only bring good things.