---json
{
  "title": "Being a Young Architect",
  "description": "I have been thrust into a role as an architect at a young age and with very limited experience. This post serves as a bit of a diary of my struggle with imposter syndrome.",
  "date": "2017-08-26",
  "tags": [
    "architect",
    "imposter syndrome",
    "learning"
  ]
}
---

I will be one of the first to admit that so far in my career I have been lucky in my career path. It is not that I haven’t worked incredibly hard to get where I am but, at the same time, opportunities have definitely fallen into my lap. Largely one of the things I have benefited from is potentially swimming in small ponds therefore making myself look like a bigger fish than I actually am. This was definitely the case with my first job as my coworkers were definitely more IT focused and not as familiar or interested in the coding side of our work. Therefore (starting as an intern and later as a contracted worker) I took over all development needs which included rewriting major business applications while still in school and with basically no previous work experience. This forced me to learn fast and develope critical skills. I have been at my current job for a little more than two years and been able to grow immensely in the opportunities given to me. While not necessarily a small pond it feels like I just walked into the wrong door and was accepted as someone that knew what they were doing. 

So what is it that I’m actually referring to here? It shouldn’t come as much of a surprise but it’s [imposter syndrome](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impostor_syndrome). Imposter syndrome gets discussed fairly regularly in the technology industry likely because we work in a very intellectually driven environment and I think that lends to the effects of imposter syndrome. To be honest, for some time I thought imposter syndrome was a term only used in the technology industry but as I have researched it further it (understandably so) is much larger than this one industry.  When I first learned about imposter syndrome I honestly didn’t have it. If you compare my skills now to what they were then it was definitely previous me that had more of reason to feel imposter syndrome. Nevertheless, I was a prideful person and thought I was the best thing that ever happened to the world. Now I’m not saying I’m a super humble monk at this point, far from it. I’m also not saying those that don’t feel that they are in the clutches of imposter syndrome are prideful people, I think most people have earned the right to live somewhere in the healthy medium. Not the most amazing developer there ever was, but does write shippable, ever improving code which is not a small feat. 

A little more about my story. Up until about a year ago I worked as “just” a software engineer (“just” meaning that was my number one job duty not “just” as in lowely and unimportant). Up until that point I had been an active participant in what we call the architecture guild in our company (modeled after Spotify’s published about [guilds](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/1018963/Articles/SpotifyScaling.pdf)). There were about 4 of us that really were the most vocal, driving the most discussion, and really holding the banner. Not that others couldn’t have done it, I believe they just didn’t have the same burning passion that we did which is fine. It was at this point that our company went through a major change in our software development lifecycle (moving from our own version of agile to [SAFe](http://www.scaledagileframework.com/) (a discussion for another day)). As part of this change our architect decided that our company had grown past what he was able to serve and therefore decided to build out an architecture team. Well it turned out that he had selected me (as well as the three other passionate software engineers from architecture guild) to join this team. At first this didn’t seem like a big deal, just working with him a little bit more but as the year has progressed we have changed a great amount. We have changed the nanem of the team, gone from being on feature teams and 20% work for architecture to full architecture, done some intense architecture training, etc. It’s really been a whirlwind. It wasn’t until recently that it really occurred to me what this all means. People have stopped referring to me as an “engineer” in discussions and instead call me an “architect.” Engineers that I have looked up to as examples of what I want to become have come to me seeking guidance on design and implementation of our software. I have sat in an architecture training with 10 other people of which many of them have been in the industry longer than I have been alive. I’m 25 years old, have something like four years of experience in the industry and am in charge of guiding the architecture of a product that rakes in 10’s of millions of dollars a year and if it doesn’t function properly can shut down companies. It’s a lot of weight on a person’s shoulders.

Reading all the articles and hearing people talk about how you shouldn’t feel like an imposter I know conceptually I shouldn’t feel the way I do. At the same time part of me says, “Well all those other people feel like the imposter, but you actually are!” What is a person to do about this? If you came to this article looking for answers you are going to be sadly disappointed. If you came for comfort that you are not alone and for camaraderie, then here I am! You are not alone and neither am I. My current plan is to take hold of the “fake it till you make it” attitude. I try to equip myself in all the ways that I can so that I am less of an imposter and more fulfilling what people think I am. So far that has worked so I will hold on to that process. Maybe that voice in my head is right, maybe I am an imposter.  Even if that is the case that gives me all the more reason to not give up this opportunity.  Maybe my employer is crazy for giving me this job but I love it and I enjoy my job. My manager starts every one of our one-on-one’s with the same question, “So Kyle, are you happy?” There are times that I am super frustrated with my job? Of course (I assume the alternative is bored with my job and I definitely don’t want that). Are there times I wish my job was a little different? You betcha! But these are small tweaks, small tweaks within my control.  So to all the imposters out there this is the advice I am giving to myself and feel free to take it for what it’s worth: You’re already in. What people expect of you is set, it’s just a matter of if you are going to do it or not.