---
title: An Argument For a Four-Year College Computer Science Degree
description: An argument set forth of the merits of a "traditional" computer science education.
date: 2022-05-16
hero_image: ./cs-degree-hero.jpg
tags:
  - Education
  - Computer Science
  - software development
  - Learning Styles
---

Every year about this time I am flooded with images and reminders that it is graduation time. This invariably reminds me of my own education. Several years ago I had the honor of graduating from Utah State University with a computer science degree. There is a solid amount of debate in the tech community about what kind of education is best for someone going into software. There are many options for those entering this path for a career. There is the traditional four-year degree, boot camps, self-taught, and probably many more. It is the method that I know the most about, the college undergraduate degree, that I would like to discuss the merits of.

First, as a point of clarification. I by no means intend to say this is the only way to be successful in a technology career. I have seen many people with a four-year computer science degree from reputable universities that could be deemed as not successful in their technology career. I have also seen very impressive and successful engineers that started their careers via a boot camp or via being self-taught. I think different methods work for different people. I am supportive of whatever works for people. Gatekeeping a certain method of learning as the only "true method" can do nothing but hurt. That being said I feel at times the four-year route is given a bad rap.

One of the main differences between something like a boot camp and a western university education is that boot camps take a vocational route versus the university where it is a liberal arts education. The liberal arts education leads to being forced to learn about various, different things rather than just the skill you are focusing on. This undoubtedly leads to this route taking much longer than a boot camp which is pretty obvious and one of the benefits of a boot camp. This said it's not always about how fast you can get from point A to point B. You need to also ask what state you are in when you get to point B. Some of these other skills are not going to be directly applicable potentially. For example, my biology classes have practically been useless to me as far as my career is concerned. Others have been quite applicable to me. Classes like my English and writing classes have been very useful to me (as painful as they may have been at the time). I find myself writing for myself, other developers, and product and business individuals. The farther that I go into my career the more important effective communication has become. I am definitely using those skills. Some courses end up somewhere in the middle like my ethics course where we talked about very practical ethical issues and discussed and thought through the ethics of different technical decisions. While it may not be something I need to apply daily the thinking exercised in that course helps shape decisions in my career and life.

The next one is less of a direct win in favor of university studies. That is the networking aspect. Without a doubt, there is networking to be had in either situation. There is something to be said for the academic environment and the influence and the creative juices that flow. You have the opportunity to interact with many people from many walks of life. While I haven't interacted with all of those I went to school with there have been some and even with those with whom our relationship ended at school were beneficial.

The next benefit to university studies is I feel like there is no match for the learning atmosphere of a university. It is said that one of the things that you learn, or at least improve in college, is learning to learn. While you can learn in many atmospheres there is just something special in that environment. Everyone is there with the single purpose of learning and education. It is not every day that you get the opportunity to focus so completely on just learning. The ability to quickly and effectively learn is a skill that is extremely applicable to a career in technology.

Finally, the foundations are focused on during a computer science education. Boot camps seem to focus primarily on a very high-level, very practical level of software development. Learn about the technologies of the day and get up and running with them quickly. Contrast this with a university track. While knowing how compilers, computer hardware, and Big-O notation work may not be something you use every day it can be a foundation that is invaluable when it comes up. I know I have applied the knowledge of algorithms and other low-level computer hardware understanding to solving problems in my day-to-day job. These things can be learned outside of a university atmosphere but the packaged good of the CS education I find useful.

There are likely other reasons that I haven't covered but I think this covers some of the major themes for me. Finding whatever works for you is the most important part. I would love to be in a world where all options are available to everyone. Unfortunately, I have to admit that nowadays universities are getting more and more expensive and financially moving out of reach for many. This is an unfortunate problem no doubt. However, if you do have the option and that learning style works for you and the benefits described above resonate with you, go ahead, and give it a try. It worked well for me and many that I know.