---
title: Ideas on Performing High Value Code Reviews
description: Tips and tricks for performing high-value code reviews and affecting organizational change.
date: 2022-04-18
hero_image: ./high-value-code-reviews.jpg
tags:
  - Code Review
  - Software Engineering
  - software development
  - Clean Code
---

One of my favorite ways to learn is reading other people's code and having others read mine. A place we have that opportunity often is during code reviews. I know that code reviews are not everyone's favorite thing to do but I find them extremely valuable and enjoy doing them. Unsurprisingly, there are various levels of quality when it comes to code reviews. I have seen the whole range from a complete waste of time, to preventing show stopping data corruption issues.

At my job, we have a requirement that all code entering the main branch of a repository must receive a code review. This can lead to something as simple as someone Slacking another person and saying, "Can you press approve on this?" to multi-hour marathons with hundreds of comments. These two extremes are neither ideal. That being said, what is the correct level of attention for a code review, doing no review likely will allow many things through that could have been caught, but analyzing every code change to death will slow down development. Recently I have had the opportunity to change teams where we took some people from one side of the organization and some people from another and combined them. Even though we worked under the same umbrella and were under the same requirements, the interpretation and implementation of those requirements were vastly different. Neither was inherently right or wrong but they are different. One of these differences was in our code reviews. Those coming from the side of the organization I have historically worked with take code reviews extremely seriously. We have high standards for the code and have certain style and functionality expectations. The other side of the team came from a more operational side of the organization where they were in charge of stopping the bleeding when defects or issues were found. This being the case, they focused more on speed and the bare minimum to get things back working (which makes sense as more change means more risk). So how can you have such disparate groups work together?

The first step in making code reviews (and just working together in general) more enjoyable and successful is to agree on expectations. What do you as a team value? How do you enjoy working? What constitutes a show stopper of an issue vs something lower in urgency? If you don't synchronize these answers as a team your code reviews will just lead to frustration. Some will be pointing out and asking for things that others may not see value in (such as code styling) while others will be frustrated because they may perceive others aren't taking the code review seriously. The standards that you end up on may not be exactly what you hoped for, even so, the fact that you are all pushing in the same direction is extremely powerful and will pay more dividends than many things.

Next comes education on proper code review etiquette. If someone hasn't worked within a strong code review culture being thrown directly into the frying pan will not end well. If you are a more intense reviewer, ease someone new to that to the way you work. I am known as a pretty intense reviewer at work and have occasionally had my name turned into a verb when people say their code has been "Kyle-d" when I drop a review on it. This is something I am working on making sure it stays a positive verb. I have been told I provide immense value in my reviews but also they can be intimidating.

As the reviewer, make sure to find good things that the person has done and call those out. While calling these things out won't make the code better today (although it will improve the code tomorrow as you use positive reinforcement) there are humans behind all code, remember that. Also, understand when things are simply your preference and when they truly matter. If your company has a coding style and it's not being met, feel free to call that out and educate people where they can learn more. Even better use automated tooling to handle these types of tasks. If something is not covered by a coding style and is simply your preference of how things may look either leave it alone or call it out as a preference. Sometimes I will call out at the beginning of a comment "(Not something I would block a review over just my opinion take it or leave it)". Some people simply start with "nit:" calling out a nit-pick comment. Being forthright with this can take the sting out of comments. Provide resources to learn more or to defend what you are after. Maybe someone opens a DB connection and never closes it. Rather than just commenting something like "This is a connection link" you can call out how they could fix it and maybe reference code that handles it well or an article that explains how to solve the problem. Another thing I find helpful is phrasing your comments as questions. Maybe this is just an American way of speaking but it seems to take out much of the fire of comments and also leaves the door open to being told you are wrong. Rather than, "You should use a HashMap here not a LinkedList" you can comment something like, "Why did you choose a LinkedList here, I would have thought a HashMap would be better here due to (some attribute of how the code is working)". Maybe the author will see this and agree and change it or maybe they will come back with a very logical argument pointing out something you didn't consider. Either way, there is a great chance someone leaves with learning something new which is a win. Even if you don't have a suggested change but find a piece of the code surprising I can find it useful to throw a few questions on a review if I have them as well. This shows interest in the work of the author and often ends up with me learning something new.

Doing code reviews like this is hard work, no doubt about it. It is meaningful work though. Much of what I have learned has come from doing code reviews for others and learning from how they solve problems and from having others review my code. It has truly made me a better developer. Code reviews performed in an inopportune manner though can have severe negative effects. People can leave with a bad taste in their mouths and choose to avoid code reviews in the future. As a code reviewer, you need to remember you are taking care of the humans first and the code second. That doesn't mean we need to be soft or coddling of people, it simply is recognizing the fact that software engineering is largely a human experience, and if the human side isn't handled, the code will never reach the quality and success it has the potential to.