---json
{
  "title": "When Proof of Concepts Become Production Code",
  "description": "Proof of concepts are invaluable in software development. If we allows ourselves to ship these POCs to production we introduce many risks.",
  "date": "2023-04-17",
  "hero_image": "./poc-hero.jpg",
  "tags": [
    "Clean Code",
    "software development",
    "Proof of Concept",
    "Software Craftsmanship"
  ]
}
---

Often when embarking on the implementation of a new piece of functionality or a new product entirely a common first step is to build a proof of concept (POC). Proof of concepts are a valuable tool in software development and provide various benefits. These benefits include the ability to test out new technology, validate ideas, gain stakeholder buy-in, and fail quickly. There is a reason that they are so widely used. For all their benefits they do come with their own risks. Unfortunately, in today's fast-paced development environment, there can be a push to take your POC code and push it to production. To help avoid falling into this trap let's consider some of the reasons it may happen.

Often POCs are developed to present to others. Many times you are testing out a product idea and then presenting it to stakeholders. When others see these seemingly working solutions they may think the works is almost done and may push for it to quickly finish. This leads to tight deadlines where there isn't time to carefully review the code and make it production ready. Thus developers can fall into the trap of simply shipping the POC as a shortcut. Another way a POC can make its way into production is that the POC is developed by one person and handed to a different person or group to implement for real with insufficient documentation. The implementing developer may not understand what the code is doing or how it is working. They haven't gone through the discovery process and so are missing out on the learning from the POC. Thus again the shortcut is taken of "It seems to be working" so they will ship it. I have seen this happen several times in my work. As a software architect, I would implement a POC (or many POCs) when trying to discover a path forward for a particular solution. After passing this POC over to the implementing team and then later code reviewing the code going into production I could see almost all the code untouched. Stubbed-out methods and other completely broken code would occasionally still be there. For all of this talk of ways that a POC can make its way to production, what is the problem with doing this?

One of the benefits of POCs is the speed they can be developed. Where does this speed come from? This often comes from cutting corners. These may be edge cases skipped, security issues left unresolved, scalability issues undiscovered, etc. No matter the corner skipped it has a cost and one we shouldn't accept in production code. While not having all these attributes in a proof of concept is fine, the standard should be much higher for production code. This quickly developed code can often have poor software quality. Keeping this code in production leads to technical debt that will slow down future development and must be paid for later in the development cycle.

With a better understanding of the risks of deploying POC code to production let us consider some steps we can take to prevent this from happening. A huge step that can be taken is to clearly communicate the scope, goals, and limitations of the POC with stakeholders before developing it. Make it clear that this POC will be throw-away code and that there will need to be major rework if the POC is successful before the code can see the light of day and be production-ready. Another method that can be taken is to raise your standards of what you will accept in a POC. If you are confident that you have the time and the discipline to start over after a POC is finished this is not as important, but if you know you will not have that time you should take the time to follow your regular software development practices to make sure you are producing high-quality code. Knowing which of these environments you are operating in can only be determined by you and takes self-awareness. I have worked with an architect before that would do all of his proof of concepts in C# even though he worked at a Java shop. This had an interesting dynamic of forcing the developers consuming his code, at the very least, to port his code to Java but it would often mean they would get a better understanding of what they were building as well as allowing them to increase the quality of the code. While I don't think this was the reason he wrote all his code in C# (I'm pretty sure it was just familiarity) it did have that interesting benefit.

POCs are an invaluable tool in software development without a doubt. They allow developers to throw off some of the weight that comes with following rigid quality processes. This can lead to increased velocity and greater innovation. That said they come with their risks especially if we blindly ship them into production. By taking the above ideas to heart we can mitigate this risk and by practicing proper software development we can reap the benefits of the use of proof of concepts while avoiding their dangers.